Learning Management System
Introduction
Purpose
The primary purpose of this recommendation report is to determine and assess which learning management system (LMS) is the best choice for aiding the students’ learning, whether it be face-to-face, online, or hybrid. The LMS that will be considered and compared are Canvas and Blackboard. The final recommendation on which LMS is the most suitable for aiding students will be based on the features and accessibility of the LMS.

Background and Description of Options
A learning management software is a platform that is “used for creating, delivering, tracking, and reporting educational courses and outcomes” (U.S. Department of Interior). An LMS aids in student learning as it allows students to access course contents, turn in assignments, and even complete quizzes and tests. Additionally, an LMS allows students to monitor their grades on the courses they are taking, all on one website and a mobile application. In other words, an LMS helps “emulate a physical classroom element” (Putka). Ultimately, with each LMS having an array of features and some unique to one, it is essential to pick an LMS that does not hinder student learning because of its flaws.

As mentioned, Blackboard and Canvas are the two LMS that will be compared. Blackboard is a web-based LMS that helps students improve their learning experience in any class modality  (Pardo-Bunte). Blackboard helps the students by “providing an interactive experience that meets individual needs and assists educators in shaping each learner’s path” (Acharya). Meanwhile, Canvas is “one of the best beginner-friendly LMS systems” compared to other existing LMS (Acharya). It is also a web-based LMS, like Blackboard, aiding students as they go through their journey in education.

Criteria
The analysis of Blackboard’s and Canvas’ features and accessibility will determine which LMS is better. Considering that both LMS offers an array of features, the features comparison will be narrowed down to the grade book, calendar and to-do list, and announcements. On the other hand, the accessibility of both LMS will be determined by the functionality issues of their mobile applications. The issues that will be addressed are the performance of the application, the notifications, and the log-in issues.

Discussion
Features
Gradebook
The implementation of the grade books of the two LMS have some similarities but differ greatly. Both LMS displays the grade, due dates, and status of each assignment, quiz, test, project, and many other activities in that particular course. Not only that, both LMS allow instructors to add comments about students’ submissions which can be viewed by the students in the grade book (King). The last grade book feature that is somewhat the same for both LMS is the automatic calculation of total grades.

Although the grade book similarities are relevant when making a comparison, the differences between Blackboard and Canvas—whether it be the same grade book feature with a different implementation, or an entirely different feature only implemented on one LMS—are important too. In Blackboard, the grade book shows a list of all activities that can be sorted to display all, only graded, only upcoming, and only submitted items. On the other hand, Canvas’ grade book shows a list of all activities that can be arranged—not sorted unlike Blackboard—by the due date, name, module, and assignment group. On top of that, Canvas shows score details and allows the calculation of what-if scores—something that Blackboard does not have—which allows students to “calculate their total grade by entering hypothetical grades for assignments” (Canvas LMS).

With the implementation of their grade book, the addition of a helpful grade book feature, and the survey results, Canvas would be better in assisting student learning in terms of the grade book.

To-Do list
Blackboard and Canvas approached the design and implementation of their to-do lists differently. Blackboard opted for a basic and clean look, while Canvas added some design elements yet remains simple and straightforward. In Blackboard, the to-do list displays assignments that are due and past due; the What’s due section groups the assignments into today, tomorrow, this week, and future which refers to the due dates of the assignments. On the contrary, Canvas’ list displays all the to-do assignments from the beginning to the end of the semester and always defaults to the current date (Kanumilli). Additionally, Canvas allows students to add a new item to the to-do list page without having to go to the calendar, unlike Blackboard.

Students like the implementation and the design of Canvas more than Blackboard. On the basis of both LMS’ to-do list design and implementation and the survey results, Canvas’ to-do list wins over Blackboard’s.

Announcements
Like the to-do list, the implementation of the announcements of both LMS differs greatly. In Canvas, the announcements can only be found inside the course and the to-do list view unlike Blackboard’s which can be found inside and outside the course. As mentioned, Canvas’ announcements can only be found inside the particular course that the student is viewing the announcements from, which can be sorted by display all or only unread. Additionally, Canvas allows students to search the announcements using the search bar, as seen in Figure 3. On the contrary, when Blackboard’s announcement is viewed inside the course, the only announcements that will be displayed are that particular course’s announcements. Otherwise, it will display all announcements made by the institution, the organizations that the student is part of, and the courses that the student is currently taking. Also, it can be sorted by display all, only courses and organizations, and only institution announcements.

Regarding the announcements’ content, it is clear that Canvas offers more content customization compared to Blackboard. Blackboard’s announcements include basic text formatting options, allow multimedia embedding and file attaching, and the inserting of audio and video recordings (Blackboard). On the other hand, it can be observed that Canvas also has basic text formatting options, however, when a Youtube link is included, it can be previewed and watched directly from the announcement.

Students like the implementation of Canvas’ announcements better than Blackboard’s. However, both implementations are unique to each LMS and are helpful in their own ways. With that said, Canvas’ announcements appear to be better than Blackboard’s announcements as the provided features of Canvas appear to be more accommodative in the education of the students.

Accessibility
The accessibility of the LMS is worth noting when picking which is the most suitable one for students. Having access to an LMS through a mobile application is one way to further the accessibility of an LMS. Inherently, the functionality of the mobile application should be fantastic for the LMS to be accessible. The mobile application of an LMS should have an excellent software performance and should function just like the website or nearly have all the necessary features just like the website. Also, it should have little to no issues at all. With that said, both LMS’ mobile applications include all the basic and necessary features that are on their websites and function the same with only slight changes to accommodate being a mobile version. Since the mobile application is only a tool that helps students to stay connected when they are not able to access the actual LMS website, fully implementing all of the features from the website to the mobile application is not necessary.

According to the study conducted by Venter et al, Blackboard’s mobile application showed poor performance and device compatibility among students enrolled in the Central University of Technology, which lowers the accessibility of Blackboard (McGravey). Blackboard should also improve its software to prevent it from freezing and crashing (Procter). Like Blackboard, Canvas is not without performance issues as its mobile application is occasionally slow when loading course content. Both LMS needs to improve the performance or speed of their application. it is evident that performance is an issue that should be resolved for both, and all the more for Blackboard.

Another fix that should be made for Blackboard and Canvas is their notifications. There are times when a Canvas notification takes forever to load when clicked. and sometimes, it does even not load at all which requires an application restart. Likewise, when a Blackboard notification is clicked, the mobile application takes a while to load and it never automatically leads the students to the content. For example, if Blackboard notified a student that an assignment is graded, it will only display the course dashboard and not the assignment that has been graded. Although it is not a critical issue compared to others, it is a hassle for students. it shows that Blackboard’s notification needs a lot more improvement than Canvas’.

In addition to the performance and notification, the log-in issues that Blackboard and Canvas have is another matter that needs addressing. Blackboard’s issue is that it randomly logs students out of their accounts. On the contrary, Canvas’ issue is that there are times when students are unable to log in even though correct credentials are inputted. It might seem that Canvas’ issue is more prominent than Blackboard's, it is only rare that this issue arises. Nevertheless, both issues are important matters that need an immediate fix as it is something that can affect student success.

Although it might seem that both applications fall short of students’ standards, it is evident that Blackboard needs major improvements. With that said, Canvas beats Blackboard in terms of which LMS is more accessible.

Conclusion and Recommendation
Summary
Blackboard and Canvas both provided features that are helpful in student learning, however one LMS has outdone the other. Canvas’ grade book beats Blackboard’s because of its implementation and the addition of the What-if scores feature. Additionally, the implementation of Blackboard’s to-do list and announcements are far too simple and do not offer unique attributes. Meanwhile, Canvas is able to play linked Youtube videos straight out of their announcements page. Furthermore, Blackboard needs to address the critical issues that their mobile application has including the log-in problems where it randomly logs students out of their accounts, performance issues where it takes a while for content to load, and the issue of the notifications where clicking it will not automatically lead the student to the actual content. Although Canvas also needs to fix all of its mobile application issues, Canvas’ mobile application is far more optimized than Blackboard’s. From the features to the accessibility comparison, it is apparent that Canvas is the most suitable LMS for aiding student learning. So, this whole report concludes and recommends Canvas as the most suitable learning management system in comparison to Blackboard.

Personal Recommendation
From my personal experience with both LMS, I can say that Canvas is incomparable to Blackboard. Both Canvas’ website and mobile application design make navigation easy. Meanwhile, it took me some time to figure out how to navigate through Blackboard's website and mobile application. I also like the implementation of Canvas’ features more than Blackboard’s as it is simpler and user-friendlier. With that said, I recommend Canvas as the best LMS to use for aiding student learning without any hassle.
